Beneath the waves lies Earth's last
frontier, the deep ocean. A world of
crushing pressures, freezing
temperatures, and total darkness where
strange life forms exist beyond
imagination. For centuries, it remained
beyond human reach. That is until 1960
when the Ba'iscap Triest proved
otherwise, descending nearly 11,000 m
down to the deepest point on Earth. In
this video, we've modeled the Trieste
inside and out to reveal the engineering
that made the first crew dive to the
ocean's deepest point. I'm Lion and this
is Deconstructed. We break down the
engineering behind history's most
fascinating and today's most advanced
machines and structures. So, let's see
how it works. Before we can understand
how the Triest conquered the abyss, we
first need to see what it was up
against. So, let's dive from the
shoreline to the bottom of the deepest
trench and watch how humans slowly push
deeper with each breakthrough.
The journey begins at sea level. Just
below the surface, the seafloor
stretches out into the continental
shelf. The shallow zone where humans
learned to dive. Early free divers could
reach a depth of about 30 m here,
descending with nothing but the air they
carried in their lungs to gather food
and resources.
By the early 20th century, hardhead
diving suits pushed this limit further
with heavy copper helmets and air pumped
down from the surface reaching depths of
nearly 100 m. A remarkable step, though
it's still shallow compared to what lay
ahead. At around 200 m, light begins to
fade and the ocean floor drops away from
the continental slope. This marks the
start of the twilight zone where
sunlight weakens rapidly with depth.
Even today, modern military submarines
rarely venture beyond a few hundred
meters. In 1934, humans reached a new
milestone, descending to a depth of 923
m in the baosphere, a spherical
unpowered deep sea submersible lowered
into the ocean by a cable from a surface
ship. By 1,000 m, we enter the midnight
zone, where sunlight disappears entirely
and darkness becomes absolute.
Then at 2250 m, the sperm whale, one of
the deepest diving mammals, reaches its
limit. Here the pressure is immense,
around 25 megapascal, or 250 times the
atmospheric pressure at sea level, which
is like the weight of an off-road
vehicle pressing on an area the size of
a postage stamp. Descending further, the
slope levels out into the continental
rise between 3,000 and 4,000 m down. It
was here in 1953 that the newly built
Triest broke its first world record
after becoming the first man vessel to
reach 3,150
m.
At 3,800 m lies the wreck of the Titanic
resting on the floor of the North
Atlantic.
Beyond 4,000 m lies the Abyssal plane, a
vast flat seafloor stretching between
4,000 and 6,000 m deep. Life is sparse
here where darkness is total and
pressure is crushing. Then the seafloor
plunges into the oceanic trenches, the
deepest parts of the planet. Around
8,849 m, you could invert Mount Everest
and its peak would still be nearly 2 km
from the deepest ocean trench.
By around 10,000 m, you've reached the
cruising altitude of a commercial
airliner.
At last, we arrive at the deepest known
point in Earth's oceans, Challenger
Deep, which lies 10,984
m down. Here, pressure exceeds a
staggering 100 megapascal, like the
weight of a semitr pressing on an area
the size of a postage stamp. First
identified in 1875 by the British Royal
Navy survey ship HMS Challenger, it is
located in the western Pacific Ocean at
the southern end of the Mariana Trench,
named after the nearby Mariana Islands.
On January 23rd, 1960, the Triest, which
had been modified after the
record-breaking 1953 dive, became the
first vessel to reach this point,
carrying oceanographer Jacqu Peicard and
US Navy Lieutenant Don Walsh on a
descent that lasted 4 hours and 47
minutes to a depth of 10,916
m. This record-bolding man deep sea dive
stood unchallenged for nearly 60 years.
And even today, only a few dozen people
have ever reached the deepest place on
Earth.
All of it leads to a single question.
How was the vessel built to endure the
crushing depths of the ocean? The answer
lies in the design and engineering of
the Triest.
Before we dive deeper, we created this
poster to go along with this video, and
we're giving one away. To enter, just
like the video, subscribe, and comment
below. What surprised you the most about
the Triest? We'll announce the winner in
the next upload. And if you'd like to
grab one now, the link is in the
description.
The Triest itself was a special kind of
deep sea submersible called a baisgaff.
The name comes from ancient Greek,
meaning deep ship, a free diving vessel
able to move on its own instead of
hanging from a surface cable like the
bathosphere mentioned earlier in this
video.
Submersibles like the Batiscaff still
depended on a support ship for launch
and recovery though unlike submarines
which are completely independent
vessels.
Its design paired two key elements.
Beneath a massive buoyant float hung the
pressure sphere or the cruise cabin.
Spherical geometry spreads external
pressure evenly and the shape makes the
sphere the safest possible enclosure
when facing the crushing forces of the
deep. The Batiscav's float was packed
with aviation gasoline, chosen because
it's lighter than water and only
slightly compressible even under extreme
pressure. This gave the craft the
buoyancy it needed to rise back to the
surface after the dive. The entire
design worked on the principle of a free
balloon in air. The float acted like the
gas bag, while the pressure sphere below
served as the gondola carrying the crew.
Ba'iscaps were first invented in the
late 1930s by Swiss physicist August
Peard, who had previously pioneered high
alitude balloon flights before turning
his attention to the ocean's depths.
Years later, his son Jacqu Peicard would
pilot the Triest and break deepest dive
records. Only four baists gaps were ever
built, each capable of diving several
thousand meters. Triest was the second
of these designs named after the Italian
city where it was constructed later
purchased and modified by the US Navy.
It became the first vessel that
ultimately carried humans to the
planet's deepest known point, the
Challenger Deep.
As we take a closer look at the
engineering of the Triest itself, it's
important to understand some basics for
orientation.
Like surface ships, submersibles use
standard nautical directions. forward
for the front, aft for the back, port
for the left side, and starboard for the
right. The Trieste measured 18.1 m long,
and 3.5 m wide, weighing 50.8 metric
tons empty, about the weight of a large
bulldozer and 152 metric tons when
filled with gasoline. Too heavy for most
ships to lift, the Triest was towed to
its dive site, a decision that
influenced the streamlined shape of its
float. The pressure sphere of the Triest
was a forg steel cabin 26 m in diameter
with 130 mm thick walls, strong enough
to endure extreme pressure. By itself,
the pressure sphere weighted a massive
14.5 metric tons, which is about the
weight of a city bus.
Access to the pressure sphere was
through a hatch. Inside, the compact
cabin provided a very small space for
two people along with the life support,
control, and navigation equipment needed
for the dive. For outside observation,
the sphere was fitted with two small
viewports, the primary forward viewport
and an additional one in the rear. Each
measured only about 100 mm in diameter
and were made from a single tapered
block of acrylic glass. The only
transparent material strong enough to
withstand the immense pressure of the
deep ocean. Mounted on the float were
the key components that allowed the
trias to descend, maneuver, and safely
touched down on the seafloor.
At the stern sat the fixed rudder,
providing stability while the vessel was
being towed across the surface.
Next to it hung the guide rope, a 24 m
steel cable suspended beneath the float.
This line reduced lateral drift during
descend and absorbed part of the impact
when the submersible made contact with
the seabed, ensuring a softer landing.
Clusters of external flood lights were
also mounted under the float, ready to
illuminate the bottom during approach
and observation.
Most critical of all were the ballast
hoppers. Two conical tubs recessed at
the bottom of the float, one forward and
one aft of the precious sphere. each
held about eight tons of iron shot, the
weight that enabled the trius to sink.
To return to the surface, this shot had
to be released. The iron shot was
secured by electromagnets arranged
around a funnel-shaped orifice at the
base of each hopper. When energized, the
magnets kept the shot firmly in place.
When the circuit was switched off or if
power failed, the magnets lost their
hold and the shot flowed freely,
lightening the craft and starting the
ascent.
Because pressure at extreme depths made
the submarine method of blowing water
out of tanks with compressed air very
impractical, this magnetreleased iron
ballast system was essential to
controlling buoyancy.
Mounted above the float were other
systems that kept the Trius safe and
maneuverable during its dive. Three
electromagnet release assemblies held
the ballast dubs and the guide rope in
place. Each dub was attached to a chain
running through the float and connected
to one end of a pivoting arm. The other
end secured by an electromagnet.
In an emergency or power failure, the
magnets could be released causing the
arm to pivot and drop the chain
instantly jettisoning the tubs. The
guide rope could be released the same
way. At the surface, the arms could be
locked firmly in position with a pin and
a turnbuckle to prevent accidental
release.
The Trieste was equipped with two small
low-speed horizontal electric
propellers, mounted ports, and
starboard. These allowed careful
short-range maneuvering once the
submersible reached its target depth.
Completing the upper structure was the
cunning tower, a sturdy framework rising
above the float. This tower provided the
only access to the pressure sphere
below, serving as the entry and exit
point for the crew. Inside the float was
a carefully arranged network of
compartments and a passageway. Crew
members entered the pressure sphere
through an entrance tube or anti-chamber
fitted with a ladder that ran from the
conning tower down through the float.
The tube ended in an elbow joint
connected directly to the sphere. During
a dive, this entire passage flooded
completely. At the back of the elbow set
a curved acrylic window, allowing a
clear view through the sphere's rear
viewport to check the ax ballast tub and
its light. The float itself was divided
into 14 compartments. At each end were
two water ballast tanks which provided
the negative buoyancy needed to begin
descend. The remaining 12 compartments
were buoyancy tanks, all filled with
about 130,000 L of aviation gasoline.
Now, let's take a closer look at how the
Trieste operated during a dive. The crew
first entered the pressure sphere
through the top entrance tube and sealed
the hatch. To begin the descent, the end
ballast tanks and the entrance tube were
flooded with seawater, creating the
negative buoyancy needed to begin
sinking. As the submergible descended, a
spring-loaded two-way breathing valve on
the float opened inward, allowing
seawater to enter the gasoline tank and
equalize the pressure inside the float.
This step was crucial because gasoline
is slightly more compressible than
water. The float needed pressure
compensation to keep it from being
crushed as the gasoline compacted. The
denser seawater settled to the bottom of
the float while the gasoline compressed
above it. With increasing depth, the
gasoline's volume and therefore buoyancy
gradually decreased. To maintain a
steady descend, small amounts of iron
shot were released from the ballast
hoppers, ensuring a controlled sink
rate. After a few hours of descent, the
vessel approached the seafloor and
external flood lights were switched on
to guide navigation and observation. The
guide rope touched bottom first, taking
some of the impact and helping to
stabilize the vessel before the pressure
sphere settled gently onto the ocean
floor. When the mission at depth was
complete, more iron shot was released to
start the ascent. As the trius rose, the
expanding gasoline forced seawater back
out through the breathing valve,
accelerating climb automatically.
Once back at the surface, compressed air
was used to blow the water out of the
entrance tube before opening the hatch.
Later, the support ship supplied air to
blow out the ballast water tanks,
resetting the system for the next dive.
By the late 1960s, a new generation of
deep sea submersibles began to take
over. Smaller and more agile than the
Trieste, these craft abandoned the bulky
gasoline float in favor of pressurer
resistant buoyancy materials such as
syntactic foam. Designs like DSV Alvin
set the template. Compact, maneuverable,
and equipped with robotic arms and
specialized instruments for scientific
sampling.
Exploration kept pushing forward. On
March 26th, 2012, film director James
Cameron piloted the Deep Sea Challenger
to the Challenger Deep. Only the second
crude mission thereafter the Trieste
1960 dive and the first solo descent.
Though its maximum depth of 10,98
m was just shy of Trieste record, the
craft was dramatically different. Less
than 1/10enth of the Trieste weight,
11.8 8 metric tons, only 7.3 m long, yet
carrying far more cameras, scientific
instruments, and capable of a much
faster ascend and descent. Since then,
several other crude dives have followed,
continuing the exploration of the
world's deepest point. These advances
mark how far deep ocean engineering has
come since the Trieste first touched the
bottom of the world's oceans, and how
that pioneering dive made today's
discoveries possible.
Quick shout out to our last giveaway
winner. Congratulations.
And a quick thank you to our Patreon and
YouTube members. You'll be getting this
exclusive desktop background inspired by
today's video. Thanks for watching. Stay
curious.